will Israel obey the ruling of the un's
top Court the international court of
justice has ordered Israel to prevent
acts of genocide in Gaza and it says it
has a month to report on its compliance
but what does this ruling mean for
Palestinians who are trapped and under
attack this is Inside
Story
hello there and welcome to the program
I'm nstasia Tay the United Nations top
court has ordered Israel to take
measures to prevent genocide in Gaza and
to allow in humanitarian Aid the
international court of justice issued
their ruling on Friday in a case that
was filed by South Africa judges voted
overwhelmingly in faor of six emergency
measures that included asking Israel to
punish those inciting genocide so how
will this ruling impact Israel's war on
Gaza and how might other countries
pressure Israel to comply there's plenty
to discuss with our guests but first
this report from Michael Apple takes a
closer look at the icj's
ruling in a historic ruling the world
court has determined there's plausible
evidence of genocide unfolding in Gaza a
judgment welcomed in Palestine it means
that the cries and suffering of our
people in Gaza have been heard in the
Great Hall of Justice the un's top Court
also known as the international court of
justice says Israel must take six
provisional measures to ensure the
Palestinian people are protected and
submit a report within a month detailing
its
compliance South Africa brought the case
to the icj accusing Israel of violating
International laws on genocide in the
territory and and it sees the ruling as
victory for human
rights our core purpose was really that
it is vital to highlight the plight of
the innocent in
Palestine and to also uh alert the
International Community to the great
harm that uh is being done uh to the
people of Palestine the Israeli Prime
Minister's response was one of defiance
condemning the ruling and calling it a
disgrace Israel's commitment to
international law is
unwavering equally unwavering is our
sacred commitment to continue to defend
our country and defend our people like
every country Israel has an inherent
right to defend itself the vile attempt
to deny Israel this fundamental right is
blatant discrimination against the
Jewish
state but still for Palestinians this is
a watershed moment in their struggle for
Liberation from Israeli occupation and
its war and many are now watching to see
how South Africa will use this ruling to
increase its diplomatic efforts in
calling for an end to Israel's war
inside the Gaza Strip Mike leppel for
Inside
Story well let's now bring in our guests
in London we have Nim suani a reader in
public law at soas at the University of
London he is also the editor and chief
of the Palestine yearbook of
international law in Melbourne Australia
we have Jeffrey Robertson a human rights
Barrister and also the founder of Dy
Street Chambers one of the largest human
rights legal practices in Europe also
joining us today from London is Chris
gunnis a former spokesperson for the UN
Agency for Palestinian refugees and also
the founder of the Myanmar
accountability project a warm welcome to
you all thank you gentlemen for joining
us today on inside story now the icj
hasn't just said
that there's the plausibility of
genocide taking place it's also
implemented these six emergency measures
and I know there's been plenty of
concern about the icj here not calling
for a ceasefire but by my understanding
the icj only has jurisdiction over
States right so here it has jurisdiction
over Israel it doesn't have jurisdiction
over Hamas and and obviously a cire
would actually take two parties in order
to comply we've heard though from NED
pandor the South African foreign
minister saying that that these six
measures effectively amount to a a deao
ceasefire Chris you've worked on the
ground there what do you make of that is
this effectively a ceas fire without
necessarily calling it
one well first of all let me say that
the icj ruling is truly historic a
historic milestone in the Long Road of
the Palestinians towards dignity and
Justice and statehood and yes I agree I
have worked on the ground and if the
Israeli Army does what it's now legally
Bing they've been told by legally
binding a judgment by this court to do
stop killing you know that's the first
part of article two of the convention
cease actions which harm both mentally
and physically promoting conditions of
life that don't see babies being killed
if the IDF actually does that then as
the South Africans have said it is a de
facto ceasefire how can you deliver
humanitarian Aid unless there's a
ceasefire so I think the South AF the
court was very very clever because
ultimately what they asked for was
American foreign policy towards Israel
they said okay the ceasefire may be
difficult but as Anthony blinkin keeps
saying and the absence of that let us
have adherence to International um law
and by the way the other important thing
that was said is that it's the clues in
the name it's the convention on the
prevention and Punishment of genocide
and judge Dono made it very clear that
three people in particular prime
minister Netanyahu defense minister yav
Galant and the president it Herzog they
are guilty of inciting genocide and the
convention is very clear they have to be
punished and Israel has to report back
within 30 days on the steps it's doing
to implement that so I think when I say
this is a historic Milestone it moves
the whole debate about Palestine yes the
laws of occupation all that matters
humanitarian law all of that matters we
can now talk about the law of genocide
the crime of crimes and news
organizations and commentator such as
those on our program can legitimately
talk about Israel's responsibility to
stop and prevent genocide and the state
parties to the convention America
Britain they have to bring meaningful
pressure on Israel I'm thinking here of
America's four billion dollars worth of
military aid and all the Diplomatic and
political protection in the security
Council they have to use all of that to
see the convention implemented we've
moved to a new phase and that's why
yesterday was truly historic and N I see
you you nodding there let me bring you
in here and ask you to reflect on the
magnitude of this ruling indeed I agree
with Chris this is a Monumental uh
decision by the international court of
justice on the one hand once South
Africa submitted its application to the
international court of justice it
already changed the conversation it
changed the Western narrative over the
war on Gaza and on the inan people and
now that the interal court of justice
the highest court in the international
legal system have basic has basically
accepted the South African narrative
that there is a risk of genocide here
that this is beyond the simply violation
of international uh laws of war and that
this risk of genocide uh against a
substantial part of the Palestinian
people uh require action urgent action
first of all from the court but also
from All State parties that are uh need
to that need to discharge their
obligation to prevent genocide and
obviously as Chris said the provisional
measures such as the requirement from
Israel to allow effective and immediate
humanitarian assistance require scaling
down drastically Israel's military
operations if not a complete
ceasefire because the court also cited
the UN Secretary General who said that
effective humanitarian assistance is not
possible with the continuation of the
bombardment and the Israeli military uh
ground incursions so in order for Israel
to comply with these provisional
measures it has to allow uh scaling down
of the military operations uh in add in
addition as Chris said
the political repercussions of this
legal ruling are far reaching on the one
hand it increases pressure on Israel
both internally externally we saw
internally there is a lot of discontent
now because the war hasn't achieved its
aims declared aims by the government the
families of the hostages are now
increasingly protesting that is a
beginning of protests against the war in
some Israeli cities and there is ACC
ations in the media that Netanyahu is
prolonging the war for his political
survival and now externally this ruling
will embarrass all the Western backers
of Israel because now they have been
possibly supporting a genocide and now
any action they will be taking will be
judged Visa their obligation to prevent
genocide I want to get into the
nitty-gritty of of all those political
consequences in just a moment but I want
to pick up on something that that Chris
mentioned earlier you use the phrase
legally binding we know this ruling is
legally binding but crucially the court
the icj does not have an enforcement
mechanism and we've heard already from
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu he
says that he's rejected the ruling
outright so it doesn't look like Israel
is likely to comply with what the court
is is asking for here Jeffrey let me
bring you into this discussion what
legal recourse is there if Israel says
no we just not going to do
it there is no legal recourse the court
the same court two years ago brought in
an order against Russia which had most
wickedly disrupted the order and broken
the law against aggression by invading
uh an innocent country namely Ukraine
and Ukraine went to the court and the
court immediately and unanimously
ordered Russia to put its arms down of
course it didn't Putin who is a massive
war criminal on any view uh refused and
so uh went on and was not brought up but
I do think that the importance of the
ruling goes beyond its unenforceability
because this is not Russia where
everyone is scared to do the right thing
because it's got nuclear weapons uh
Israel has nuclear weapons but it
depends on the support of Western Powers
particularly the United States but also
European countries and if there's one
Chorus Line that has been used by all
Western countries in commenting on on
the Gaza War it is we M Israel must obey
international law and Israel has said
that itself has bound itself and its
support to international law now the
court by first of all
accepting the case what is called its
jurisdiction that was the main issue and
that's the issue that Israel lost so the
court declares itself competent to give
orders and does give a few the first
order of course is that Hamas should
release
unconditionally the hostages that it has
so obscenely taken from Israel the
second order and perhaps the most
important because it is uh enforceable
by pressure from Israel's backers is
that it should lift the threat of
starvation and allow
humanitarian convoys in and then there
are other orders that Israel will no
doubt say it is complying with and which
other well let let me jump in there
Jeffrey
because mention important
Point civilian sorry to sorry to
interrupt you Jeffrey I just want to
pick up on something that you were
saying there about allowing access for
Aid and one of the interesting things
that I noticed was that um in this case
so in this particular case both South
Africa and Israel also appoint judges to
sit on the court so instead of the
regular 15 there were there were 17 and
the the Israeli judge voted for two of
these measures in favor of them so to
punish incitement to genocide and also
on Aid access and and primarily because
Israel by my understanding is is saying
that Aid is already unhindered Chris as
someone who used to work for unra let me
ask what you make of that
assertion well I think it's absolutely
right and I think an Israel as an
Israeli a highly respected Israeli judge
he was actually in charge of the Israeli
Supreme Court when I was a spokesman for
anra and I went to the Supreme Court and
was amazed and delighted by how he was
trying to professional
the Supreme Court so he's highly
respected but yes I think like a lot of
people in Israel he's utterly disgusted
by the fact that the politicians there
have made it so easy for the South
Africans to make their argument about
the intentionality behind the genocide
um threats which were very very clearly
put by the South Africans and I think
also on this question of humanitarian
Aid it's absolutely the case that you
know it has to get in it is a collective
punishment to you know more than half of
the G scrip are children and even more
are women so you know it's it's it's
something which is Israel simply has to
step up to its humanitarian obligations
but if I may I wanted to ask Jeffrey if
I could just ask Jeffrey something very
quickly when Jeffrey talked about the
lack of enforceability um Jeffrey what
about State parties what about the other
150 odd signatories to the convention
surely as we're seeing in America where
in the federal court in California Biden
and blinken and Austin are being accused
both of complicity in genocide and
failing to prevent genocide now when it
comes to enforcing what we heard
yesterday surely the Judgment of the
Court gives griss to the mill of those
people in jurisdictions who are trying
to hold the state parties to account for
failing to implement the genocide
convention what are your thoughts on
that
Jeffrey my thoughts on that are very
clear because I think the court was
scrupulous in not finding that Israel
had committed genocide it had simply
said it is arguable and it
particularly pointed out the kind of
statements that hurts of the president
and the defense minister had been saying
about Palestinians being
animals who should be liquidated that's
the kind of
genocidal intent that
shows but in fact there is another
argument a traditional argument that
Israel is not committing genocide
because it is seeking to wipe out Hamas
which is a political
organization and so it
is it is in effect committing
politicide if you like but not genocide
because it is acting out of uh attacking
the politic these are arguments that are
going to be made down the L Israel's
right to exist let me jump in there
Jeffrey because a lot of these
discussions are going to happen as we
look at the the broader case that the
genocide case which could take years as
as we've seen I want to bring in Nim
here because I could see you shaking
your head as Chris was speaking and I
also have a subsequent convers um a
subsequent question within your
conversation gentleman which was around
this question of intent and we have
heard a lot of these statements from
very senior government officials and and
one of the requirements of the ruling
from the icj was to punish the
incitement to genocide and when we're
talking about um politicians who perhaps
have have some level of immunity I'm
curious about how that's supposed to
take place as well n let let me bring
you
in yeah I had a kind a minor
disagreement with Chris with respect to
the description of the role of Haron
Barak so I and other Palestinian legal
Scholars have at least since 2007 been
writing about the ways in which Aon
Barak legitimize the occupation and that
and we coin the term a diplomat judge
because his liberal rhetoric his human
rights uh the image and the activist
judge image actually was used by Israel
including Ariel Chon in 2004 to
whitewash Israel's crimes and under his
uh leadership of the Supreme Court in
Israel the apar system has Consolidated
and the occupation became much more
brutal when he was appointed to the uh
as an adhoc judge in theal court of
justice the Z media said okay now this
is the time to examine what Aon Barak
has been telling them TR them for
decades that Jud judicial review
expansion inside Israel will protect
Israel and Israeli soldiers from
persecution on the world stage and that
the high court will be a shield for
Israel on the international level and
indeed in his uh
uh like separate report for the
international court of justice he
rejects the genocide accusation he
rejects the that there is a genocide
genocidal intent and he said H that he
agreed with these two measures because
he thinks Israel is already complying
with these and indeed his impartiality
was questioned because in November he
gave a statement to the glob and mail
the Canadian newspaper in which he said
that he thinks Israel has been compliant
with International humanitarian law so
he is a bias judge that was appointed by
Israel specifically for a symbolic value
and order to provide a
counternarrative now with respect to
your question
the uh obligation now on Israel is that
to they have to punish all these
statements of incitement to genocide and
the obvious problem is that the these
statement have been so prominent so
dominant for three months inside Israel
that it really can be separated from
actual State policy because why did
Israel for 3
months not do anything about these
statements even though they were daily
on TV by senior officials by members
ofet by Army generals Etc and now they
Stand Accused that by fa by failing to
discharge their obligations under the
genocide convention because they did not
prevent these statements they did not
punish these statement and the only
attempt to do anything about these
statements was after South Africa uh
submitted it application indeed this
shows the importance of the South
African application again and it's it as
Chris was pointing out has changed the
narrative and this ruling certainly has
changed the narrative within the context
of this new narrative that we're talking
about I want to ask you Jeffrey I'll go
to you first about the arms trade treaty
because I I was looking at at the
phrasing and it prohibits parties from
armed transfers if they have knowledge
at the time of authorization that the
arms or items would be used in the
commission of genocide crimes against
humanity grave breaches of the Geneva
Convention attacks directed against
civilian objects or civilians protected
as such or other war crimes so what is
now at stake here when we're when we're
using the phrase genocide and the
genocide
convention what's at stake here for
countries like Canada the UK and and
crucially the United
States I'm glad you picked up on that
because that is of course one of the
great questions and there are already
protests outside um arms manufacturers
who are supplying arms for transmission
to Israel and for use uh it may be in
non- genocidal contexts for example uh
providing uh
fire hydrants and and means
of peacefully uh although nonetheless
forcefully stopping protest
there's always been a question about
that but if you can identify a shipment
of arms that goes to uh the IDF the
Israeli Defense Force for use uh as
bombs cluster bombing or whatever uh
indiscriminate bombing which kills
civilians and by killing civilians kills
uh all almost half uh children under the
age of 18 and this is one of the red
lines that Israel has breached the the
killing of children U then it can be I
think the decision can be prayed in Aid
uh for injunctions sought by either Pro
Palestinian groups or pro peace groups
in Britain and Canada but again there
are limits because this judgment does
not say and it's very careful not to
convict Israel of genocide it simply
says that there's an argument to be made
which may take a year or
two being evaluated evidence is being
gathered to theth I want to ask about a
little more about enforcement because
one possible route that's been suggested
is the United Nations security Council
they're meeting again on Wednesday to
discuss Gaza obviously up until now the
US has vetoed multiple resolutions
trying to stop the fighting at the
security Council now that we have this
ruling if there is a resolution that
that's proposed at the security Council
as there is seemingly likely to be in
line with the measures that have been
described by the icj in its ruling does
it then put a huge amount of pressure on
Washington not to veto because
essentially and let me put this this
question to you Chris essentially a veto
would be a vote against what the US has
always been a proponent of a rules-based
international
order absolutely and I think that's what
is one of the things that's so clever
about what the court has done because
its judgment Accords Almost 100% with
American policy towards Israel it's not
demanded as ceasefire though I argue
that it's a de facto ceasefire and the
court is saying Israel has to abide by
and then the judge laid out a whole
series of stipulations which Anthony
blinken himself entirely agrees with so
I think it's going to be very very
difficult for the Americans I think
Biden will come under huge pressure um
to make sure there is not a Vita and the
other wider question I think is as so
much of the other congrations in the
Middle East for example the houthis are
holding up the Israeli alleged genocide
against Gaza um as their causus belly
and I think that the Americans will also
be aware that if it does veto this then
the anger that's fueling this wider
conflagration in the Middle East will
become deeper and can I just very
quickly say that the point I was making
about Barack is that within Israel
itself he's revered and the fact that he
has basically thrown his vot behind
punishing Netanyahu makes it very very
difficult I think politically it's a
real problem for Netanyahu I wasn't
sugesting for a moment I know very well
what Palestinians think of him and I
entirely agree I I want to pick up on on
where we started this discussion which
was how Monumental this this ruling
really is Nim the global South for a
long time has felt very marginalized
when it comes to international law
institutions and the way that that cases
particularly in Africa for instance have
been treated so let me ask you does the
ruling that we've seen this week does it
does it change things for South afria
afca does it does it restore some Faith
perhaps in international law
institutions for not only South Africa
and for Palestine but but also the
broader Global
South well first I'm I'm surprised to
with the suggestion that the uh interal
court of justice ruling Accords with
American foreign policy I think the
international court of justice ruling is
in fact puts to shame all Western uh
countries including the US who basically
were treating uh the powerful states and
their allies like Israel as above the
international order and all their claims
as uh of uh rules-based order since the
beginning of the sth October at least
have been exposed as hypocritical as
selective as basically non-existent when
the victims are not white Europeans or
North American so this leads me also to
your question which is uh Palestine in
this casee and this uh uh situation of
genocide in Gaza is a lmos test for
international law it shows how
international law fails to protect uh
what is basically considered as
Expendable
populations compare how the
international Court Criminal Court
compare how the whole Western World
treated ukrainians and Ukrainian
civilians and victims of Russian
aggression indeed heard a lot about
double
standards yeah with how Palestinians
have been treated so South Africa making
this claim is challenging the
international legal system to stand by
test for the international legal system
indeed I'm afraid we'll leave the
discussion there for now it's a it's
obviously a conversation we'll be having
again and we'll be following this case
very closely as it continues on its way
through the courts for now though thank
you to all of our guests n salani
Jeffrey Robertson and Chris Gunners and
thank you too for watching remember you
can watch this again anytime by visiting
our website al.com for further
discussion do go to our Facebook page
that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory remember
you can also join the conversation on X
our handle is at AJ insid story from
Minar and the whole team here bye for
now
make sure to subscribe to our channel to
get the latest news from Al
jazer